Thecurrentissueandfulltextarchiveofthisjournalisavailableat
www.emeraldinsight.com/2049-6427.htm
IJIUS Cooperative control of UAV
1,3
swarm via information measures
Haoyang Cheng, John Page and John Olsen
The School of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering,
256
University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia
Abstract
Purpose–Thisstudyaimstoinvestigatetherule-baseddecentralisedcontrolframeworkforaswarm
ofUAVscarryingoutacooperativegroundtargetengagementmissionscenario.
Design/methodology/approach–Thisstudyistoinvestigatetherule-baseddecentralisedcontrol
frameworkformissionswhichrequirehigh-levelcooperationbetweenteammembers.Thedesignofthe
authors’controlstrategyisbasedonagent-levelinteractions.Differenttoacentralizedtaskassignment
algorithm,thecooperationoftheagentsisentirelyimplicit.ThebehaviouroftheUAVsisgovernedby
rulesetswhichultimatelyleadtocooperationatasystemlevel.Theinformationtheoreticmeasuresare
adoptedtoestimatethevalueofpossiblefutureactions.Thepredictionmodelisfurtherconsideredto
enhancetheteamperformanceinthescenariowheretherearetightcoupledtaskconstraints.
Findings – The simulation study evaluates the performance of the decentralised controller and
comparesitwithacentralisedcontrollerquantitatively.Theresultsshowthattheproposedapproach
leads to a highly cooperative performance of the group without the need for a centralised control
authority. The performance of the decentralised control depends on the complexityof the coupled
taskconstraints.Itcanbeimprovedbyusingapredictionmodeltoprovideinformationsuchasthe
intentionsoftheneighboursthatisnotavailablelocally.
Originality/value–Theachievableperformanceofthedecentralisedcontrolwasconsideredtobelow
duetotheabsenceofcommunicationandlittleglobalcoordinatinginformation.Thisstudydemonstrated
thatthedecentralisedcontrolcanachievehighlycooperativeperformance.Theachievableperformance
isrelatedtothecomplexityofthecoupledconstraintsandtheaccuracyofthepredictionmodel.
Keywords UAV,Decentralizedcontrol,Simulation,Multi-agentsystem,Flight,Flightcontrol,
Decentralizedcontrol
Papertype Researchpaper
Nomenclature
F transitionmatrix
z observationvector
w,Q process noise and its covariance,respectively
v measurement noise
i, I information state contribution and its associated information matrix,
respectively
c,R observation noise and covariance matrix, respectively
^y;Y informationstate and informationmatrix,respectively
x,P target state and state covariance,respectively
H(X),h(X) entropyofdiscreterandomvariablesandcontinuousrandomvariableX,
respectively
I(x,z) mutualinformationobtainedaboutarandomvariablexwithrespecttoa
InternationalJournalofIntelligent random variable z
UnmannedSystems
Vol.1No.3,2013 a bearing angle ofthe target measured by the vehicle
pp.256-275 x,Z distances ofthe target in x and ydirections
r 204 E 9- m 64 e 2 ra 7 ldGroupPublishingLimited . .
x; Z velocities of the targetin xand ydirections
DOI10.1108/IJIUS-01-2013-0001
1. Introduction Cooperative
Withrecenttechnologicaladvancesinautonomouscontrolandcommunication,multi- control of UAV
roboticsystemsarereceivingagreatdealofattentionduetotheirincreasedabilityto
swarm
carryoutcomplextasksinasuperiormannerwhencomparedtosingle-roboticsystems.
Multipleautonomousagentsworkinginagroupexceedthesumoftheperformanceof
theindividuals.Withrapidtechnologydevelopmentinunmannedaerialsystems(UAS),
onboardcommunicationandcomputationcapacity,intensiveresearchhasbeencarried 257
outonthe cooperative control of groupsof UAVs. The resultsof thisresearch on such
systemscanbefoundinsearchandrescue,intelligence,surveillanceandreconnaissance
(Bourgault et al., 2003; Furukawa et al., 2006; Nigam and Kroo, 2008; Ceccarelli et al.,
2007). The cooperative control of UAVs is a complex problem that is dominated by
uncertainty,limitedinformationandtaskconstraints.Bothcentralisedanddecentralised,
decision and control algorithms have been developed to address this complexity.
Centralised decision and control algorithms optimise timing and task constraints but
require intensive computation and robust communication. Decentralised decision and
controlalgorithmstradeoptimalityandpredictabilitywithrobustnessandadaptationto
environmentalchanges.Aself-organised(SO)system,orswarm,istypicallyadecentralised
controlsystemmadeupofautonomousagentsthataredistributedintheenvironment
and follow stimulus response behaviours (Garnieret al., 2007). Examples from social
insects, such as foraging and the division of labours show that SO systems can
generate useful emergent behavioursatthe systemlevel.
Significant research effort has been invested in recent years into the design and
simulation of intelligent swarm systems (Bonabeau et al., 1999). Intelligent swarm
systems can generally be defined as decentralised systems, comprised of relatively
simple agents which are equipped with the limited communicational, computational
and sensing abilities required to accomplish a given task (Altshuler et al., 2006).
ApplyingtheseconceptstoaUAVswarmwasfirstexploredbyFrelingeretal.(1998).
Theyexaminedwhether moderncommunication, sensorsand technologiesinrobotic
architecture would permit the development of decentralised control to command
aswarmoflowcostmunitions.Gaudianoetal.(2003)extendedtheworkofFrelinger.
In their paper, they adopted random, repulsion, pheromone and global decentralised
control strategies. In the research of Price (2006), ten self-organisation rules were
implemented whose weight factors were collected into a single fitness function. This
function was further refined using a genetic algorithm (GA) within the simulation.
A similar technique was also adopted by De Vries and Subbarao (2011) who used
apotentialfunctiontogeneratesteeringcommandstocontrolaswarmofquadrotors.
Another widely adopted mechanism is digital pheromone maps that imitate the
foragingbehaviourofants.Digitalpheromonesaremodelledonthepheromonefields
oftheindividualvehicles.Bysynchronisingtheir mapstheUAVscoordinatetoavoid
redundant searches (Erignac, 2007). Similar to digital pheromone maps, Scerri et al.
(2007) used a binary Bayesian grid filter to represent the probability that there is
a radio frequency emitter within the global map and applied a Rapidly expanding
Random Tree path planner todetermine UAV paths forlocatingtargets.
The previous research that applies swarm methodology was limited to relative
simplescenarioswhichdonothavecomplextaskconstraints.Inthisstudy,theproblem
of assigning multiple UAVs to time-dependant cooperative tasks is investigated.
A time-dependent cooperative task is one that requires multiple agents to perform
separatesubtaskssimultaneously,orwithintheavailabletimewindowsofcooperative
agents(i.e.twoormoreagentsareassignedsubtaskswithinthesamemission,andthe
IJIUS agentshavelimitedtimewindowstocompletetheirtasks).Suchproblemshavemainly
1,3 been investigated by using centralised task assignment algorithms. Kingston and
Schumacher(2005)intheir papersolvedthisproblemwithaMixedIntegerLinear
Programme (MILP) that addressed task timing constraints and agent dynamic
constraints togenerate aflyable path. AGAisusedtoefficiently searchthespaceof
possible solutions andprovide thecooperative assignment(Shima andSchumachery,
258 2005). The following assumptions and restrictions were added to their studies: first,
targets had constant heading. This assumption can be justified for targets travelling
along known roads. Second, targets were stationary since the sensor footprint is
much larger than the distance travelled by the target during the simulated scenario.
Since MILPs are inherently non-deterministic polynomial time NP-complete, this
algorithmscalesexponentiallywiththenumberofUAVs.Moreover,inthepresenceof
moving targets, the whole solution must be recalculated as the states of the targets
change,makingthisapproachunfeasibleasareal-timesolution.Third,thecentralised
assignment algorithm can be computed by either a centralised agent (e.g. command
centre or team leader) or redundantly by each of the UAVs. With either approach,
up-to-dateinformationoneachUAV’sstateconsistingofposition,headingandvelocity,
has to be shared across the whole network. Any fault invehicle state measurements
and vehicle to vehicle communications might cause uncoordinated assignments or
inconsistent team decision making.
The main contribution of this research is the investigation of the decentralised
control framework that enables efficient operations for a large-scale UAS performing
a cooperative task when a centralised decision maker cannot or does not exist.
The proposed methodology is designed based on agent level interactions through
thecombinationofdirectinteractionandindirectinteraction.Directinteractionsarethe
obviousinteractionswhereagents,ingivencircumstances,sendoutrequestsandother
agents who received the requests later respond. Indirect interactions are made via
stigmergy. Stigmergy is the mechanism within which individual behaviour modifies
theenvironment,whichinturnmodifiesthebehaviourofotherindividuals(Bonabeau
etal.,1999).Inthis study,stigmergyisusedtocoordinate the behaviouroftheUAVs
duringthetrackingstageviamutualinformation.Informationtheoryhasbeenwidely
used in the area of sensor management. Mutambara and Durrant-Whyte (1994)
proposedadecentraliseddatafusionalgorithmusinginformationtheoreticmeasures.
Theylater considered sensor management and control essentiallyas maximising the
information gain of the network as a whole (Durrant-Whyte and Grocholsky, 2003).
Acombinationofparticlefilteringfornon-parametricdensityestimation,information
theoreticmeasuresforcomparingpossibleactionsequencesandartificialphysicsfor
providingapproximatecooperationbetweensensornodeswerepresentedtoaddresses
theproblemofsensormanagementforalargenetworkofagilesensors(Kreucheretal.,
2007).Ryanetal.(2007)developsarecedinghorizoncontrolformulationwithmultiple
step lookahead for a team of sensors to cooperatively search for and track a target,
whichhasthepotentialtoproducefarbettersolutionsbyaccountingforsensormotion
constraintsanddelayedpayoff.TheFisherinformationmatrixwasalsoconsideredto
quantify the information provided by the measurements, which lead to trajectories
designed for UAV tracking ground targets with vision based sensors (Ponda et al.,
2009).Informationtheoreticmeasureshavealsobeenappliedinexplorationmissions
togenerateinformativepathsfor unmannedplatforms(Singhetal.,2009;Yangetal.,
2013).Forthiswork,wedonotaddressthepathplanningproblemfortrackingUAVs.
ThetrackingUAVonlypredictsthemutualinformationgainforthenextcontrolstep.
Ourmainfocusinthisstudyistoevaluatetheefficiencyoftaskallocationoftheoverall Cooperative
groupresourcesover the multiple targets. control of UAV
Theremainderofthispaperisstructuredasfollows.Followingtheproblemstatement
swarm
inSection2,Section3describestherule-basedcontrolframework.Simulationresultsand
analysisarepresentedinSection4andasummaryofthestudyisgiveninSection5.
2. Problemstatement 259
Theproblemofinterestisadynamicvariantoftheknowncooperativemovingtarget
engagement mission, described and analysed by Kingston and Schumacher (2005).
In this scenario, a group of UAVs is operating over a defined area tracking and
attacking several ground based moving targets. Instead of assuming the targets are
stationaryrelativetotheUAVsasinpreviousresearch,thetargetmotionisrepresented
usingastate-spacemodelwithmotionuncertainty.EachUAVisassumedtobeequipped
with radar-based Ground Moving Target Indicator (GMTI) to measure the locations
and range rate of the ground targets relative to the UAVs and a sensor to detect the
presenceofotherUAVswithinapredefineddistance.Thismissionrequiresthatthetarget
becontinuouslytrackedbytwovehiclesduringtheattackphasewhileanadditionalUAV
launchesaguidedweapon.Theinformationfromthetrackingvehiclesisfusedtoform
aprecisetargetlocationfortargetingtheweapon.Sincethecooperativesearchalgorithm
for distributed, independent swarm UAS has been addressed in previous research
(Pack and Mullins, 2003; Erignac, 2007), we remove the global search stage from the
scenarioassumingtheinitialpositionsofthetargetsareavailabletotheUAVs.
The GMTI sensor footprint in this study is assumed to be a circular sector-shape
with a minimum and maximum radius.The GMTI sensors areDoppler based which
meansthatamovinggroundtargetcanonlybedetectedandtrackediftherangerate
relative to the vehicle is above some minimum detection velocity. Thus the tracking
UAVshavetostaywithinsomeoffsetanglefromtheheadingofthemovingtarget,to
maintain this relative velocity. Figure 1 shows the heading of the target and the
associatedtarget’sregionofdetectability(lightgreyarea).Withinthetargetdetection
region,theonboardGMTIradarscandetectandtrackthetarget’smotion.Thesensor
footprint(darkbluearea)isshownpointingfromthesideoftheUAV.AstheUAVflies
alongthearcofacirclecentredonthetarget,thesensorfootprintcanlockonthetarget
(cid:2)
Figure1.
Schematicdiagramfor
cooperativetracking
IJIUS constantly.Tofurthercomplicatetheproblem,thedifferenceinbearinganglesyofthe
1,3 trackingUAVstothetarget,arerequiredtobegreaterthanacertainvaluetoreducethe
targetlocationestimationerror.ThetargetkinematicmodelandGMTImeasurement
model are presentedin thefollowing.
The primary objective of target tracking is to estimate the states of the target.
Atargetisusuallytreatedasapointobjectintrackingproblems.Thekinematicmodel
260 of the target describes the evolution of the target states. The target kinematic model
considered in this study is a commonly used model called the discrete white noise
accelerationmodel(RongLiandJilkov,2003).Thecorrespondingstate-spacemodelis
givenby:
xðkþ1Þ¼FðkÞxðkÞþGðkÞwðkÞ; ð1Þ
. .
wherethestatevectorx¼[x;x;Z;Z].xandZarethedistancesofthetarg
.
etinx
.
andy
directions from the origin point. The corresponding velocities are thus x and Z:w(k)
istheconstantvelocityofthetargetduring thetime periodk,w(k)DTistheincrease
in the velocity of the target during this period, while w(k)DT2/2 is the average
accelerationofthetargetduringthisperiod.w(k)ismodelledasawhiteGaussiannoise
sequence denoted by w(k)BN(0,Q(k)), where:
" #
s2 0
QðkÞ¼ x ð2Þ
0 s2
Z
The standarddeviationofprocess noise s ands is settobe 0.5metrespersecond.
x Z
The transition matrix is:
2 3
1 DT 0 0
60 1 0 0 7
FðkÞ¼6 7 ð3Þ
40 0 1 DT5
0 0 0 1
and the vectorgain multiplying the process noise is given by:
2 DT2=2 0 3
6 DT 0 7
GðkÞ¼6 7 ð4Þ
4 0 DT2=25
0 DT
Tosimplifytheproblem,weassumethatthedynamicmodelofthetargetisknownto
theUAVs.Inmanypracticalsituations,thedynamicmodelofthetargetbeingtracked
is not available to the tracker or it may possibly be time-varying, e.g. manoeuvring
targets. The techniques used to deal with such problems can be found in
Bar-Shalom et al. (2001).
In this study, the UAVs are assumed to be equipped with GMTI sensors
(Bar-Shalom, 2000). The measurement equation is given by:
zðkÞ¼hðxðkÞ;kÞþvðkÞ ð5Þ
Themeasurementvectorz(k)comprisespositionsinthexandydirectionsandrange Cooperative
.
rater where: control of UAV
. . . swarm
rðkÞ¼xðkÞcosaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞþZðkÞsinaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ ð6Þ
v v
wherea(x(k),x (k))isthebearingangleofthetargetmeasuredbythevehicleattimek.
v
Thesensor measurementmatrix is givenby:
261
2 3
1 0 0 0
hðxðkÞ;kÞ¼4 0 0 1 0 5 ð7Þ
0 cosaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ 0 sinaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ
v v
v(k) in Equation (5) is the Gaussian measurement noise vector denoted by
v(k)BN(0, R(k)), where:
2 3
s2ðkÞ s2 ðkÞ 0
x xZ
RðkÞ¼6s2 ðkÞ s2ðkÞ 0 7 ð8Þ
4 Zx Z 5
0 0 s2.
r
The error statics for sensor measurements are given in terms of the range standard
deviation s, the range rate standard deviation s. and the bearing angle standard
r r
deviations ,whichareknown.Inthisexercise,theyaresettocorrespondto5metres,
a
1 metre per second and 0.001 radians. With these and the position variances, the
covariancecan be calculated as:
s2ðkÞ¼rðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ2s2sinaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ2
x v a v ð9Þ
þs2cosaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ2
r v
s2ðkÞ¼rðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ2s2cosaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ2
Z v a v ð10Þ
þs2sinaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ2
r v
s2 ðkÞ¼ðs2(cid:2)rðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ 2s2ÞsinaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ
Zx r v a v ð11Þ
(cid:3)cosaðxðkÞ;x ðkÞÞ
v
where range of the target r(x(k), x (k)) measured from each vehicle is evaluated at
v
xðkÞ¼x^ðkjk(cid:2)1Þ:
3. Decentralised cooperativecontrol
In this section, a rule-based control framework, which effectively generates
cooperative behaviours of multiple UAVs is presented. A swarm system can be
definedasadecentralisedsystemmadeofautonomousagentsthataredistributedin
the environment and follow simple probabilistic stimulus-response behaviours
(Garnieretal.,2007).Theindividualswithintheswarmsystemarenotabletoassess
aglobalsituationandcontrolthetaskstobecarriedoutbytheotheragents,i.e.there
isnosupervisorinaself-organisingswarmsystem.Forexample,eachtimeanagent
performs an action, the local environment is modified by this action. The new
IJIUS environmentalconfigurationwilltheninfluencethefutureactionsofotheragents.This
1,3 processleadstotheemergentpropertiesofthecolonyatthesystemlevel.Inthisrule-
basedapproach,eachvehiclecanswitchbetweenfourbehaviouralstates;thesebeing
cruise,standby,attackandtrack.Ineachstate,thebehaviouroftheUAVsisgoverned
bylocalrules.Theswitchbetweenbehaviouralstatesistriggeredbychangesoflocal
environment, e.g.target states and request received fromneighbours.
262
3.1 Information theoreticcooperative tracking
Inordertotrackthetargets,theUAVsintrackmodehavetosatisfythesensorgeometry
constraintsandmaintainseparatedline-of-sightanglestothetarget.Theestimationerror
inthepositionofthemovingtargetcanbereducedbymultiplesensorswithseparated
line-of-sight angles to the target, with preferablyorthogonal views (Schumacher, 2005).
Thisistreatedinpreviousresearchbyrestrictingthedifferenceinbearinganglesofthe
UAVstothetargettobe445degrees.Differenttothepreviousresearch,theangleseparation
requirementisnotenforcedbyconstraints.Sincetheperformanceofthetargetestimationis
dependentuponthepositionsfromwhichmeasurementsaretakenrelativetothetargetand
theinformationcontentofasetofmeasurementscanbequantifiedandrecursivelycomputed
byaninformationfilter,ourmethodologyistoletthetrackingUAVsflytrajectoriesthatlocally
maximisetheinformationgainforthenextmeasurement.Bydoingthis,theangleseparation
willbeformedautomatically.
The standard version of the Kalman filter uses the estimation of states x(i) and
calculates the gain with a recursive computation of the state covariance P(i|j)
(Crassidis, 2004). The information filter is derived fromthe Kalman filter in terms of
theinformationstatesvectory^ðijjÞandtheinformationmatrixY(i|j).Theinformation
state vector and informationmatrixaredefinedas:
y^ðijjÞ¼P(cid:2)1ðijjÞx^ðijjÞ ð12Þ
YðijjÞ¼P(cid:2)1ðijjÞ ð13Þ
Becausethetargetmotionstateandthesensor measurementusedinourstudyhasa
non-linear relationship (as given in Equation (5)), we utilise an extended information
filter (Mutambara, 1999). The prediction step ofthe filter is givenby:
y^ðkjk(cid:2)1Þ¼ð1(cid:2)XðkÞGTðkÞÞF(cid:2)TðkÞy^ðk(cid:2)1jk(cid:2)1Þ ð14Þ
and
Yðkjk(cid:2)1Þ¼MðkÞ(cid:2)XðkÞRðkÞXTðkÞ ð15Þ
where
MðkÞ¼F(cid:2)TðkÞYðk(cid:2)1jk(cid:2)1ÞF(cid:2)1ðkÞ ð16Þ
XðkÞ¼MðkÞGðkÞR(cid:2)1ðkÞ ð17Þ
and
RðkÞ¼GTðkÞMðkÞGðkÞþQ(cid:2)1ðkÞ ð18Þ
while the estimationstepcan be written as: Cooperative
control of UAV
y^ðkjkÞ¼ y^ðkjk(cid:2)1ÞþiðkÞ; ð19Þ
swarm
YðkjkÞ¼Yðkjk(cid:2)1ÞþIðkÞ ð20Þ
The information state contribution i(k) and its associated information matrix I(k) are
263
given, respectively,as:
iðkÞ¼rh ðkÞ T ðkÞR(cid:2)1ðkÞðzðkÞ(cid:2)hðx^ðkjk(cid:2)1Þ;kÞ
x
ð21Þ
þrh ðkÞx^ðkjk(cid:2)1ÞÞ
x
and
IðkÞ¼rh ðkÞTðkÞR(cid:2)1ðkÞrh ðkÞ ð22Þ
x x
where the Jacobian rf (k) is evaluated at xðk(cid:2)1Þ¼x^ðk(cid:2)1jk(cid:2)1Þand rh (k) is
x x
evaluatedatxðkÞ¼x^ðkjk(cid:2)1Þ:ComparedwithaKalmanfilter,theestimationstepof
theinformationfiltersimplifieswhile thecomplexityinthe predictionstepincreases.
Theinitialconditionfortheinformationfilterissetasy^ð0j0Þ¼0regardlessofx^ð0j0Þ
(Bar-Shalom etal.,2001).
Informationfiltersplayanimportantroleindecentraliseddatafusionproblemsthat
involve multiple information sources. As for a decentralised system, data fusion and
vehicle control occur locally at each individual agent with local observation and the
informationcommunicatedfromneighbouringagents.Intheconventionalapproaches
to state estimation, it is difficult to capture the statistical relationships that exist
between estimates produced by combinations of observations (Durrant-Whyte and
Grocholsky, 2003). The information filter formulation has an additive structure that
can be exploited bydistributed decision-making algorithms.
ForNsensorinformationsources,the posteriorinformationstate andinformation
matrix areobtained from:
N
X
y^ðkjkÞ¼ y^ðkjk(cid:2)1Þþ iðkÞ ð23Þ
i
i¼1
N
X
YðkjkÞ¼Yðkjk(cid:2)1Þþ IðkÞ ð24Þ
i
i¼1
wherei (k)istheinformationmatrixandI (k)representstheinformationstatecontributions
i i
ofthesensorsi¼1,y,N.Thisisassumingthatthesensorsarefullyconnectedwithno
communicationfailuresordelays.Theposteriortargetstateestimationisobtainedfrom:
x^ðkjkÞ¼Y(cid:2)1ðkjkÞy^ðkjkÞ ð25Þ
The entropic information ofthe estimated target jstates isgiven by:
1
iðkÞ¼ log½ð2peÞ(cid:2)njYi;jðkjkÞj(cid:4) ð26Þ
2
Thelogistothebase2andentropyisexpressedinbits(CoverandThomas,2006).The
mutualinformation gain Ii,j (k) for vehicle i tracking targetj is calculated from:
Track
" #
1 jYi;jðkjk(cid:2)1ÞþIi;jðkÞj
Ii;j ðkÞ¼ log ð27Þ
Track 2 jYi;jðkjk(cid:2)1Þj
FromEquation(22),itcanbefoundthattheinformationmatrixIi,j(k)resultsdirectly
from the geometric position of a UAV relative to the target. Thus, the mutual
informationwillgiveanapriorimeasureoftheinformationtobegainedfrompotential
sensing actions.
Totestandverifythismethodology,wesetupasimulationwithtwoUAVstracking
onetargetfromdifferentline-of-sightangleseparations.Thesimulationresultsofthe
trackestimationerroragainsttheseparationangleusingthesensormodelpresentedin
theprevioussubsectionareasfollows.Figure2ashowsthattheminimumestimation
error was achievedwith a separation angle between the two UAVs of approximately
90 degree line-of-sight. Figure 2b shows the entropic information plotted against
separation angle. The figure suggests that the information measure on the target is
directlyrelatedtotheestimationerror.Itfollowsthatthemoreinformationwehaveon
thetarget,themoreaccuratetheestimationofbothitspositionandvelocity,provided
that the sensors are appropriately displaced. This result verified that navigating
towards the location from where the observation is more informative (i.e. mutual
information gain calculated from Equation (27) can lead to more accurate estimation
about the target’sstatesand also maintain the desiredangle separationrequirement.
3.2 Four basic behaviours
A. Cruise. The UAV is in cruise mode if it is not engaged with any target. This
behaviourhasthreeguidancerulesthatnavigatetheUAVtowardsthenearesttarget,
dependingon the request itreceived:
. Ifthereisnorequestreceived,asshowninFigure3a,theUAVswillflytoward
the nearest target and switch to standby mode once it reaches the standoff
distance.
. IftheUAVreceivesarequestfortrackingsupportfromthestandbyvehicle,as
shown in Figure 3b, it will fly towards the tracking region of the target and
switch to track mode once it arrives. If the UAVs are already in the tracking
regionwhenitreceivestherequest,theywillswitchtotrackmodeimmediately.
5 1.8 1.6
4 1.4 1.2 3 1
2 0.8 0.6 1 0.4
0.2
0 0
0 60 120 180 240 300 360
)sertem
ni(
rorre noitisoP
)s/m
ni( rorre
yticoleV
–8.6
–8.7 –8.8
–8.9 –9
–9.1 –9.2
–9.3
–9.4
–9.5
Seperation angle (in degrees) 0 60 120 180 240 300 360
Position RMS estimation error
Velocity RMS estimation error
noitamrofnI
ciportnE
IJIUS
1,3
264
Figure2. (a)Targetpositionroot
meansquare(RMS) estimationerrorand
targetvelocity
RMSestimationerror;
(b)targetentropic
information Seperation angle (in degrees)
. IftheUAVsreceiverequestfortrackingsupport,atthesametimeitalsoreceives Cooperative
thelocaltrackdatafromanothertrackingvehicle.AsshowninFigure3c,itwill control of UAV
startrunningthetrackdatathroughthedatafusionprocessandflytowardthe
swarm
locationfromwheretheobservationcanbemostinformative.Onceitarrives,it
switches totrackmode.
B. Standby.Inthestandbymode,theUAVscirclearoundthetargetwithapredefined
265
standoff distance. The UAVs receive local track data from all the tracking UAVs and
use decentralised the data fusion algorithm to process the track (Figure 4). Once the
target track is defined accurately enough for the guided weapon, the standby UAVs
switch to attack state. This accuracy is measured by the entropic information on
the target.
C. Attack. The attack mode is simply modelled as the UAVs heading towards the
targetandlaunchingtheweaponfromapredefineddistancefromthetarget(Figure4).
The UAVs tracking the target must track the target for the duration of the weapon
flight.Oncethetargetisdestroyed,alltheUAVsengagedtothistargetswitchbackto
cruise state.
D. Track.When aUAV is inthe trackmode, itsmotionis governed by two rules:
. ThefirstrulethetrackingUAVsfollowistoplacethetargetwithinthesensor
footprint while remaining within the detectable line-of-sight angle to the
target heading.
. Thesecondruleistoincreasetheentropicinformationonthetarget.Thecontrol
andestimationprocessis conducted indiscretetime.Thetracking UAVsflyat
constantvelocitywiththeirheadingasthedecisionvariable.Theywillrequest
localtrackinformation,i.e.informationstatesy^ðkjkÞandtheinformationmatrix
Figure3.
(a)Guidancelawforcruise
mode;(b)guidancelawfor
cruisemode;(c)guidance
lawforcruisemode
Receive local track data
from tracking UAVs Figure4.
(a)Standbymode;
(b)attackmode
IJIUS YðkjkÞ from another tracker and compute the desired heading command that
1,3 maximisethemutualinformationgainforthenextobservationstep.Thisprocess
willworkrecursivelyuntilthetrackisaccurate enoughtotrigger theattack.
Intermsofcommunication,thetrackinformationisonlysharedamongthetwotracking
UAVsandtheattackingUAV.Figure5showsaschematicblockdiagramofthesensor
and communication network for engaging a target. As shown in the diagram, two
266
tracking UAVs make observations on the targets and maintain local tracks. The local
tracks are shared between two tracking UAVs and used for calculating mutual
information.Theinformationstatesandinformationmatricesaresenttotheattacking
UAVstofuseaglobaltrack.Algorithm1summarisesthebehavioursthatarefollowed
byeachUAVandtheconditionsunderwhichtheyswitchmodes(Figure6).
4. Simulationand analysis
4.1 Lyapunov potential field vs information measures
Inthiscooperativemovingtargetengagementscenario,theabilitytogenerateaccurate
tracks on the targets is critical to mission performance. The guidance rules have to
enable the tracking UAVs to fly trajectories that increase the amount of information
provided by the measurements and improve target states estimation, resulting in
propertargettrackingandanaccuratetargetlocationestimate,withoutviolatingthe
dynamicsconstraintsandsensor restrictions.Inthisstudy,wecomparetheproposed
cooperativetracking methodwithdecentralisedmethod basedon potentialfield. The
potential field method has been investigated to generate a guidance vector field that
providesthedesiredvelocityoftheunmannedsystems(RimonandKoditschek,1992;
Dale,2003;Nelsonetal.,2006).Thespecificmethodweadoptedinthiscomparisonis
fromFrewetal.(2008)work.TheirmethodisbasedonaLyapunovguidancevectorfield
that produces stable convergence to a loiter circle of predefined radius. Cooperative
Tracking UAV1
Communication
between Tracking and ∧
y (k | k),Y (k | k)
Attacking UAVs
i (k),I (k) Σ
2 2
Local track
Attacking UAV HT(k)R–1(k)
∧
y (k | k–1), k – 1 →k
Y (k | k–1) Prediction
y ∧ (k | k),Y (k | k) Σ Z 2 (k)
Global Track
Local track
k – 1 →k y ∧ (k | k–1), Tracking UAV2
Prediction Y (k | k–1)
∧
y (k | k),Y (k | k)
i (k),I (k) Σ
2 2 Local track
HT(k)R–1(k)
∧
Figure5. y (k | k–1), k – 1 →k
Schematicblock Y (k | k–1)
diagramofdatafusion Z 2 (k)
Algorithm 1
1: switch behaviour
2: caseCruise (default behaviour at the beginning of the mission)
3: if (no request received)
4: Fly toward the nearest target; Change to standby once it reaches the standoff distance.
5: elseif (tracking requestreceived)
6: Fly toward tracking region of the target; Change to track once it arrives.
∧
7: elseif (tracking request and receive y (k | k),Y(k | k)from other tracking UAV received)
8: Compute the desired heading command that maximise the mutual information gain for
the next observation step; Change to track once it arrives.
9: end if
10: case Standby
11: Circle around the target; Send request for tracking support; Process the target track;
Change to attack when the level of accuracy is achieved.
12: case Attack
13: Release weapon; Change back to cruise.
14: case Track
15: if (target tracked by single UAV)
16: Track target by maintain sensor coverage.
17: elseif (target tracked by cooperative UAVs)
18: Perform cooperative tracking (step 8); Change back to cruise once the target is Figure6.
destroyed. Pseudocodeforrule-based
19: end if controlarchitecture
20: end while
trackingbymultipleunmannedaircraftisachievedthroughadditionalphasingcontrol
lawwhichadjuststhespeedofthevehiclestomaintainadesiredrelativephaseonthe
loitercircle.Thephaseseparationissettobe90degreestominimisetheachievableerror
variance(Guetal.,2006).
Figure 7 shows the flight trajectories generated by these two methods while
trackingagroundmovingtargetfromstand-offdistance.ItcanbeseenfromFigure7a,
by following the guidancevector field, that theUAVsare attractedtothe loitercircle
about the target vehicle, and maintain the desired phase angle separation. Such
coordinationisachievedbyconstantlysharingthepositionbetweenthetwoUAVs.In
contrast,theUAVsusingtheproposedmethodheadtowardthetrackingregioninthe
early stage without any knowledge of other UAVs. As the UAV 2 is initially located
nearer tothe target, itstarts tracking thetargetearlier than UAV1.Figure7bshows
that UAV 1 receives track data from UAV 2 and plans its next move to maximise
informationwhichcausesUAV 1toloitercounterclockwise about the target.
x105
2.5
2
1.5
0.5
1
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
–2.5
noitisoP
Y
x105
2.5
UAV 1
UAV 2 2
Target
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–2
–2.5
–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3
X Position x 105
noitisoP
Y
Cooperative
control of UAV
swarm
267
UAV 1
UAV 2
Target
Figure7.
(a)Cooperativetracking
viaLyapunovpotential
field;(b)cooperative
trackingviainformation
–3 –2 –1 0 1 2 3 measures
X Position x 105
IJIUS In order to investigate the performance of these two techniques, the Monte Carlo
1,3 methodusesatotalsamplesizeof100.ThetwoUAVsarerandomlygeneratedbetween
40kilometresand55kilometresfromthetarget.Werecordthetimewhentheentropic
informationonthetargetreaches(cid:2)8.8whichindicatestheaccuracyoftheestimation.
ThesimulationresultsshowthattheUAVsspendanaverageof748secondstoreach
thethresholdusingpotentialfieldmethodwhiletheyspendanaverageof348seconds
268 using information measures. This indicates the effectiveness of the information
theoretic framework applied to cooperative tracking. Evenwithout coupled objective
functions and dynamics, i.e. no planning information is shared between UAVs; the
UAVs can still demonstrate the capability to perform cooperative tracking in a time
criticalscenario.Incontrast,theLyapunovpotentialfieldmethodismoresuitablefor
persistenttrackingasitcanproduceanasymptoticstabilitytoadesiredloiterpattern.
4.2 Centralised controlvs swarm control
In this section, the simulation results of the complete cooperative moving target
engagement scenario are presented. First an example scenario is used to explain the
proposedrule-basedcontrolframework.ThisscenarioincludessevenUAVsandthree
groundtargets.Themissionareaisasquarewhoseareais100squarekilometres.The
UAVs fly at a constant speed, governed by flight dynamics, of 110 metres per
second.TheirbehavioursaregovernedbytherulesetspresentedinSection3.2.The
targets are initially randomly distributed over the mission area and their motions
aredefinedbyEquation(1).Figure8a-cdisplaystagesofthesimulatedscenarioat
three points in time.
At 188 seconds, UAVs 1 (red) and 4 (yellow) were designated to assist in tracking
target 1 in cooperation with UAV 7 (orange). The coloured area displays the sensor
footprint ofthe tracking UAVs. The UAVs’sensor footprints havethe same colour as
the UAVs themselves. It can be noted that UAV 1 changed its heading once UAV 4
startedtrackingasaresultofthetrackingrule,i.e.,headingtowardsthelocationwhere
the measurement could yield more information. This action caused UAVs 1 and 4 to
maintainanappropriateline-of-sightseparationanglewhiletrackingthetarget.Onthe
rightside,UAV6(cyan)weretrackingtarget3whileUAV5(magenta)wasinstandby
mode waiting for tracking support fromthe secondvehicle. As can be seen from the
flightpath,UAV2(green)washeadingtowardstarget2initially,andthenchangedits
coursetohelptrackingtarget3afteritreceivedatrackingrequestfromstandbyUAV5.
After213seconds,UAV1startedtrackingtarget3aftertarget1wasdestroyedand
the track information became accurate enough for UAV 5 to attack target 3. UAV 2
switchedbacktotarget2becausetrackingsupportwasnolongerneededfortarget3.
Figure8.
( a ( a a b t t ) ) t t S s i i m m i i m m e e u u 1 2 l l a a 8 1 t t 8 3 e e d d s s e e s s c c c c o o e e n n n n d d a a s s r r ; ; i i o o 4 2 1 1 5 3 6 4 2 7 1 5 3 6 4 2 7 1 2 5 6
2 2
(c)simulatedscenario 3 3 3
attime279seconds
After279seconds,UAVs2and3weretrackingtarget2cooperativelywhileUAV7was
attacking. The information filter results for target 1 are presented in Figure 9.
Itshowsthepositionestimationerrorandstandarddeviationboundsforx-andy-axis.
As can be seen from the lower plot, the y-axis estimation results deteriorated as the
line-of-sightofUAV1totarget1approachedthehorizontal.Thisisduetothefactthat
cross-range velocity is difficult to detect using a Doppler-based radar. This is
unavoidablewhenusingonevehicletotrackthetargetbecauseofthecircularmotion
of the vehicle around the target. Both axis estimation results improved quickly after
160measurements,thatiswhenUAV4joinedUAV1intrackingthesametarget.This
is especially the case for the y-axis estimation. This result shows that the proposed
method can coordinate the trajectories of the tracking UAVs which increases the
accuracyof the estimation.
The Monte Carlo method with a sample size of 100 is used to evaluate the
proposed control framework compared with the centralised control strategy
proposed in (Kingston and Schumacher, 2005) in two scenarios. Each scenario
includessevencaseswiththenumberofUAVsprogressivelyincreasingfrom6to12.
Inscenario1,threetargetsandthewholeteamofUAVswererandomlydistributed
over the mission area at the beginning of the simulation. In scenario 2, the UAV
swarmentersthemissionareafromtheleftsideinatightformation.Thenumberof
targetsisincreasedtofour.Attheendofeachsimulation,thetimeforeliminatingall
targets was recorded. The computational intensity is one of the main issues with
the centralised algorithm. It is found out that the problems of 12 vehicles (include
bothUAVsandtargets)aresolvableino30secondsbyusingtheCPLEXsolverona
personal computer. As the size of the problems increased to 20 vehicles, the time
spent on finding solutions increased to 90 seconds. We estimate that it will take
40
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
)m(
etamitsE
noitisoP
fo
rorrE
1 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 101 111 121 131 141 151 161 171 181
x Position error
x Position SD
Number of Measurements
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
)m(
etamitsE
noitisoP
fo
rorrE
1 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 101 111 121 131 141 151 161 171 181
Cooperative
control of UAV
swarm
269
y Position error
y Position SD
Figure9.
Positionestimationerror
andstandarddeviation
(SD)oftarget1
Number of Measurements
20minutestooptimisetheproblemsof30vehicles.Thusamaximum12UAVsand
four targets are considered in our study for the comparison of centralised and
decentralised algorithms.
The average of the final task completion time for each simulated scenario are
summarisedinFigure10.Theerrorbarsshowthe95percentconfidenceintervalfor
themeanvaluebasedonthesampledata.ItcanbeseenfromFigure10athatthecurve
representingtherule-basedUAVswarmdescendsfasterthanthecentralisedcontrolled
swarm,i.e.the advantageofthecentralisedcontrollerbecomeslesssignificantasthe
numberofUAVsincrease.Forasmallsizegroupofagents,theswarmislessefficient
as centralised controller, especially for mission scenarios with strong timing and
couplingconstraints.Suchresultsareexpectedasthecentralisedcontrolleroptimising
thecommonobjectivesharedbythewholeteamandbeabletoresolvetheconflictsif
thetasksarecoupled,whilethedecentralisedcontrollercouldonlyoperateunderlocal
and environment-driven rules due to the absence of global coordination information.
AsthenumberofUAVsincrease,theUAVsonlyneedtoengagethetargetsthatare
near tothem.ThismeansthatthetasksthattheUAVsaretoperformbecomeless
coupled than in the situation where one UAV has to perform multiple tasks on
multiple targets.
Thesimulationresultsofscenario2aregiveninFigure10b.Ascanbeseen,thegap
between these two curves does not decrease as the number of UAVs increase. This
ismainlybecauseinscenario2thewholeteamofUAVsstartsatonesideofthemission
area in close formation. Such a setup causes the UAVs to lose the advantages of
spreading over the mission area. Therefore, the task assignment problem becomes
more tightly coupled than in the scenario 1. This makes it impossible for the
decentralised controller to achieve the performance of the centralised controller if
theproblemcanbesolvedinreal-time.Suchadrawbackoftheswarmsystemleadsto
the investigation of an integrating predictive model applied to individual agents to
enhance themissionperformance.
4.3 Predictive swarm
In this swarm system, individual agents neither control nor are aware of tasks to be
carried out by other agents. Even though this design enables agents to perform
separate subtasks cooperatively, the achievable performance is low. This is mainly
because in the early state of the mission, the UAVs fly towards the nearest target
without knowing that there is a possibility that other UAVs may arrive earlier and
destroythetargetbeforetheyarrive.ThiscausesanexcessivenumberoftheUAVsto
1,300
1,200 1,100
1,000
900
800
700
600
500
400
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
lla rof emit
noitelpmoc
ksat
laniF
)sdnoces
ni(
stegrat
3,300
3,200 Swarm 3,100 Centralised 3,000
2,900
2,800
2,700 2,600
2,500
2,400
2,300 2,200
2,100
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Number of UAVs
lla rof emit
noitelpmoc
ksat
laniF
)sdnoces
ni(
stegrat
IJIUS
1,3
270
Swarm Centralised
Figure10.
(a)MonteCarloresultsof scenario1;(b)MonteCarlo
resultsofscenario2
Number of UAVs
waste time on a target which can be better engaged by other members in the team. Cooperative
To address this issue, a prediction model which allows the UAVs to predict the control of UAV
intentions of their neighbours is added to the decentralised controller. This
swarm
predictionmodelusesthemixedintegerlinearprogrammingformulation(Kingston
and Schumacher, 2005) and works as a preliminary assignment algorithm. When
a UAV is in cruise mode, it senses its neighbours’ states, such as position, heading
and velocity, and uses them as the input to compute the assignment. The prediction 271
modelwillrunatthebeginningofthemissiontoallocateaninitialassignment.After
that,itwillbetriggeredbythreeevents,namely,theUAVschangebacktocruisemode
from any of the other three modes, they detect new neighbours or the neighbours’
movement deviates from the previous prediction. By setting up these rules, the load
oncomputationisexpected tobereducedand tomake theUAVsbetterabletoadapt
to uncertainty. Even though this prediction model uses the same formulation as
the centralised approach in previous research, they operate differently. First, this
prediction model is only concerned with one UAVand its near neighbours, while
the centralised approach is concerned with the whole group. This makes the
predictivedecentralisedcontrollerscaleaswellasdecentralisedcontroller.Second,
theassignmentresultingfromthepredictionmodelisjustatemporaryassignment.
Since the UAVs are in the cruise mode after receiving assignments from the
prediction model, they will still respond to any request to turn into trackers.
Although the cooperation of the swarm still relies on the interactions that take
placeamongthegroup,thepredictionmodelwillgivetheagentsanincreasedlevel
ofsituationawareness.Thustheagentswouldacceptanassignmentthatdoesnot
maximise their individual utility if they can maximise the overall team utility.
For instance, the agents will choose the targets which may not be the nearest but
by engaging such targets would potentially reduce the overall time of finishing
the mission. The following is a simulation model used to demonstrate the
increased performance by using predictive swarm comparing with simple swarm
presented early.
AsshowninFigure11aandb,theUAVswiththesimpleswarmcontrollerwereall
flying towards target 1because the rule settells them toengage the nearesttargetif
there is no request received. In contrast, the UAVs with predictive swarm controller
split into two group of three. One group headed towards target 1 and anothergroup
chose target2.
As can be seen from Figure 11c, until target 1 was destroyed, the UAVs began
to move towards target 2. On the other hand, as shown in Figure 11d, three
UAVs chose the target 2 at the beginning of the mission was already halfway
to target 2.
Aftertarget1wasdestroyed,theUAVswiththesimpleswarmcontrollerallchose
target 2. As for the UAVs with the predictive swarm controller, three UAVs that
previouslyengagedtarget1decided togototarget3after theyattackedtarget1.As
can be seen from Figure 11e and f, it took one and half minutes longer for the UAVs
with the simpleswarmcontroller to reachtarget 2.
Finally, target 3 was destroyed. The UAVs with the predictive swarm controller
finishedthemissionalmostfiveminutesearlier.Thesimulationstudyofscenario2is
repeatedincludingthepredictivedecentralisedcontrollerthistime.Ascanbeseenin
Figure12,thepredictivedecentralisedcontrollerprovidedbetterperformancethanthe
simple responsiveswarm inall cases.
IJIUS
1,3
3 3
1 1
13 5 1 5
272 246 4
3
2 6
2 2
3 3
4 1 5 11
3
3246 4
3
6
2
2 2
3 3
5 1
4
1
5 6 6
2
3 2
2 32
Figure11.
(a)Simpleresponsive
swarmat90seconds;
(b)predictiveswarmat 1
90seconds;(c)simple
6
r s e e s c p o o n n d s s i ; v ( e d) sw pr a e r d m ict a iv t e 250 2 5 13 5 6 43
swarmat250seconds; 3 4 2 3
(e)simpleresponsive
swarmat590seconds;
(f)predictiveswarmat500
seconds;(g)simple
responsiveswarmat1,115
seconds;(h)predictive
swarmat850seconds
3,300
3,200
3,100
3,000
2,900
2,800
2,700
2,600
2,500
2,400
2,300
2,200
2,100
6 7 8 9 10 11 12
5. Conclusion
This paper investigated the use of decentralised controllers for cooperative moving
targetengagementmissions.Differenttoacentralisedtaskassignmentalgorithm,the
cooperationoftheagentsisentirelyimplicit.ThebehaviouroftheUAVswasgoverned
by rule sets which ultimatelylead to a highly cooperative performance of the group
withouttheneedforacentralisedcontrolauthority.Theinformationtheoreticmeasures
are adopted to estimate the value of possible future actions and make the UAVs fly
trajectories that locally maximise the information content for the next measurement.
Two types of decentralised controllers were proposed, namely the responsive swarm
controllerand the predictive swarmcontroller.
The simulation study evaluates the performance of the decentralised controller
against the centralised controllerquantitatively.
The results show that the performance of the decentralised controller depends on
thecomplexityofthecoupledtaskconstraints.IftheincreasednumberofUAVscould
cause the tasks to be less coupled, the decentralised controller would become
competitivewiththecentralisedcontrollerinlargesizeproblems.Ifthecomplexityof
the coupled task constraints does not reduce as the size of the swarm increases, the
predictive model can be integrated into the decentralised controller to let the agents
estimate the intentions of their neighbours and choose activities which enhance the
overall team utility accordingly. The improvement in the performance by using
predictiveswarmcontrollerwasshowninthesimulationresults.However,thebenefits
ofredundancyandrobustnessofferedbyaswarmsystem,hasnotbeendemonstrated
in current design. In the future work, the adaptive ability of these two types of
controllers due to uncertainties such as communication constraints, manoeuvring
targets and threatswillbe investigated.
References
Altshuler,Y.,Yanovsky,V.,Wagner,I.andBruckstein,A.(2006),“Swarmintelligence–searchers,
cleaners and hunters”, in Nedjah, N. and Mourelle, L.D.M. (Eds), Swarm Intelligent
Systems,Springer,Berlin,Heidelberg,pp.93-132.
Bar-Shalom, Y. (2000), Multitarget/Multisensor Tracking: Applications and Advances, Artech
PrintonDemand,Norwood,MA.
Bar-Shalom,Y.,Li,X.R.andKirubarajan,T.(2001),EstimationwithApplicationstoTrackingand
Navigation,Wiley-Interscience,NewYork,NY.
lla
rof
emit
noitelpmoc
ksat
laniF
)sdnoces
ni(
stegrat
Cooperative
Swarm
control of UAV
Predictive swarm
Centralised swarm
273
Figure12.
Repeatedscenario2with
predictivedecentralized
controllerincluded
Number of UAVs
IJIUS Bonabeau, E., Dorigo, M. and Theraulaz, G (1999), Swarm Intelligence – From Natural to
1,3 ArtificialSystems,OxfordUniversityPress,BocaRaton,FL.
Bourgault, F., Furukawa, T. and Durrant-Whyte, H.F. (2003), “Coordinated decentralized
search for a lost target in a Bayesian world”, Intelligent Robots and Systems, IROS,
2003. Proceedings, 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference, Vol. 1, 27-31 October,
pp.48-53.
274 Ceccarelli,N.,Enright,J.J.,Frazzoli,E.,Rasmussen,S.J.andSchumacher,C.J.(2007),“MicroUAV
pathplanningforreconnaissanceinwind”,AmericanControlConference,ACC,9-13July,
pp.5310-5315.
Cover,T.M.andThomas,J.A.(2006),ElementsofInformationTheory,JohnWiley&SonsInc,
Hoboken, NJ, available at: http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct¼true&db¼
nlebk&AN¼158159&site¼ehost-live.
Crassidis, J. (2004), “Sequential state estimation”, Optimal Estimation of Dynamic Systems,
ChapmanandHall/CRC,London.
Dale, L. (2003), “Lyapunov vector fields for UAV flock coordination”, 2nd AIAA “Unmanned
Unlimited” Conference and Workshop & Exhibit, AmericanInstitute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics,SanDiego,CA,16September.
De Vries, E. and Subbarao, K. (2011), “Cooperative control of swarms of unmanned aerial
vehicles”,49thAIAAAerospaceSciencesMeetingincludingtheNewHorizonsForumand
AerospaceExposition,AmericanInstituteofAeronauticsandAstronautics,Orlando,FL,
4-7January.
Durrant-Whyte, H. and Grocholsky, B. (2003), “Management and control in decentralised
networks”,InformationFusion.ProceedingsoftheSixthInternationalConferenceof,2003,
pp.560-566.
Erignac,C.A.(2007),“Anexhaustiveswarmingsearchstrategybasedondistributedpheromone
maps”, AIAA Infotech@Aerospace 2007 Conference and Exhibit, American Institute of
AeronauticsandAstronautics,RohnertPark,CA,7-10May.
Frelinger,D.R.,Joel,K.andWilliam,S.(1998),ProliferatedAutonomousWeapons:AnExampleof
CooperativeBehavior,RANDCorporation,SantaMonica,CA.
Frew, E.W., Lawrence, D.A. and Morris, S. (2008), “Coordinated standoff tracking of moving
targets using Lyapunov guidance vector fields”, Journal of Guidance, Control, and
Dynamics,Vol.31No.2,pp.209-306.
Furukawa, T., Bourgault, F., Lavis, B. and Durrant-Whyte, H.F. (2006), “Recursive Bayesian
search-and-tracking using coordinated uavs for lost targets”, Robotics and Automation,
ICRA.Proceedings,2006IEEEInternationalConferenceon,15-19May,pp.2521-2526.
Garnier, S., Gautrais, J. and Theraulaz, G. (2007), “The biological principles of swarm
intelligence”,SwarmIntelligence,Vol.1No.1,pp.3-31.
Gaudiano,P.,Shargel,B.,Bonabeau,E.andClough,B.T.(2003),“ControlofUAVswarms:what
the bugs can teach us”, 2nd AIAA “Unmanned Unlimited” Systems, Technologies, and
Operations, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, San Diego, CA, 15-18
September.
Gu,G.,Chandler,P.R.,Schumacher,C.J.,Sparks,A.andPachter,M.(2006),“Optimalcooperative
sensingusingateamofUAVs”,IEEETransactionsonAerospaceandElectronicSystems,,
Vol.42No.4,pp.1446-1458.
Kingston, D.B. and Schumacher, C.J. (2005), “Time-dependent cooperative assignment”.
Proceedingsofthe2005AmericanControlConference,Vol.6,8-10June,pp.4084-4089.
Kreucher, C.M., Hero, A.O., Kastella, K.D. and Morelande, M.R. (2007), “An information-based
approach to sensor management in large dynamic networks”, Proceedings of the IEEE,
Vol.95,pp.978-999.
Mutambara, A.G.O. (1999), “Information based estimation for both linear and nonlinear Cooperative
systems”,Proceedingsofthe1999AmericanControlConference,Vol.2,2-4June,pp.1329- control of UAV
1333.
swarm
Mutambara, A.G.O. and Durrant-Whyte, H. (1994), “Distributed decentralized robot control”,
1994AmericanControlConference,Vol.2,29June-1July,pp.2266-2267.
Nelson,D.R.,Barber,D.B.,Mclain,T.W.andBeard,R.W.(2006),“Vectorfieldpathfollowingfor
smallunmannedairvehicles”,2006AmericanControlConference,14-16June,7pp. 275
Nigam,N.and Kroo,I.(2008),“Persistentsurveillanceusingmultiple unmanned airvehicles”,
2008AerospaceConference,IEEE,1-8March,pp.1-14.
Pack,D.J.and Mullins, B.E. (2003),“Towardfinding anuniversalsearch algorithm forswarm
robots”, Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2003). Proceedings, 2003 IEEE/RSJ
InternationalConference,Vol.2,27-31October,pp.1945-1950.
Ponda, S.S., Kolacinski, R.M. and Frazzoli, E. (2009), “Trajectory optimization for target
localization using small unmanned aerial vehicles”, AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and
ControlConference,10-13August,Chicago,IL.
Price,I.C.(2006),EvolvingSelf-OrganizedBehaviorforHomogeneousandHeterogeneousUAVor
UCAVSwarms,AirForceInstituteofTechnology,WrightPtrsnAFB,OH.
Rimon, E. and Koditschek, D.E. (1992), “Exact robot navigation using artificial potential
functions”,IEEETransactionsonRoboticsandAutomation,Vol.8No.5,pp.501-518.
Rong Li, X. and Jilkov, V.P. (2003), “Survey of maneuvering target tracking. Part I. Dynamic
models”, IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, Vol. 39 No. 4,
pp.1333-1364.
Ryan, A.D., Durrant-Whyte, H. and Hedrick, J.K. (2007), “Information-theoretic sensor motion
control for distributed estimation”, ASME 2007 International Mechanical Engineering
CongressandExposition,Seattle,WA,11-15September.
Scerri,P.,Glinton,R.,Owens,S.,Scerri,D.andSycara,K.(2007),“GeolocationofRFemittersby
manyUAVs”,AIAAInfotech@Aerospace,7-10May,RohnertPark,CA.
Schumacher,C.(2005),“GroundmovingtargetengagementbycooperativeUAVs”.Proceedings
ofthe2005,AmericanControlConference,Vol.7,8-10June,pp.4502-4505.
Shima,T.andSchumachery,C.(2005),“AssigningcooperatingUAVstosimultaneoustaskson
consecutivetargets using genetic algorithms”, AIAAGuidance, Navigation, and Control
ConferenceandExhibit,SanFrancisco,CA,15-18August.
Singh,A.,Krause,A.,Guestrin,C.andKaiser,W.J.(2009),“Efficientinformativesensingusing
multiplerobots”,J.Artif.Int.Res,Vol.34No.1,pp.707-755.
Yang,K.,KeatGan,S.andSukkarieh,S.(2013),“AGaussianprocess-basedRRTplannerforthe
explorationofanunknownandclutteredenvironmentwith aUAV”,AdvancedRobotics,
Vol.27No.6,pp.431-443.
Correspondingauthor
HaoyangChengcanbecontactedat:haoyang.cheng@student.unsw.edu.au
Topurchasereprintsofthisarticlepleasee-mail:reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Orvisitourwebsiteforfurtherdetails:www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints
